# Introduction

This component provides [Role-Based Access Control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Role-based_access_control)
(RBAC) authorization abstraction for the [mezzio-authorization](https://github.com/mezzio/mezzio-authorization)
library.

RBAC is based on the idea of **roles**. In a web application, users have an
**identity** (e.g. username, email, etc). Each identified user then has one or
more roles (e.g. admin, editor, guest). Each role has a **permission** to
perform one or more actions (e.g. access an URL, execute specific web API
calls).

In a typical RBAC system:

- An **identity** has one or more roles.
- A **role** requests access to a permission.
- A **permission** is given to a role.

Thus, RBAC has the following model:

- Many-to-many relationship between identities and roles.
- Many-to-many relationship between roles and permissions.
- Roles can have a parent role.

The first requirement for an RBAC system is **identities**. In our scenario, the
users are generated by an authentication system, provided by
[mezzio-authentication](https://github.com/mezzio/mezzio-authentication).
That library provides a PSR-7 request attribute named
`Mezzio\Authentication\UserInterface` when a user is authenticated.
The RBAC system uses this instance to get information about the user's identity.

## Configure an RBAC system

You can configure your RBAC using a configuration file, as follows:

```php
// config/autoload/authorization.local.php
return [
    // ...
    'mezzio-authorization-rbac' => [
        'roles' => [
            'administrator' => [],
            'editor'        => ['administrator'],
            'contributor'   => ['editor'],
        ],
        'permissions' => [
            'contributor' => [
                'admin.dashboard',
                'admin.posts',
            ],
            'editor' => [
                'admin.publish',
            ],
            'administrator' => [
                'admin.settings',
            ],
        ],
    ]
];
```

In the above example, we designed an RBAC system with 3 roles: `administator`,
`editor`, and `contributor`. We defined a hierarchy of roles as follows:

- `administrator` has no parent role.
- `editor` has `administrator` as a parent. That means `administrator` inherits
  the permissions of the `editor`.
- `contributor` has `editor` as a parent. That means `editor` inherits the
  permissions of `contributor`, and following the chain, `administator` inherits
  the permissions of `contributor`.

For each role, we specified an array of permissions. As you can notice, a
permission is just a string; it can represent anything. In our implementation,
this string represents a route name.  That means the `contributor` role can
access the routes `admin.dashboard` and `admin.posts` but cannot access the
routes `admin.publish` (assigned to `editor` role) and `admin.settings`
(assigned to `administrator`).

If you want to change the authorization logic for each permission, you can write
your own `Mezzio\Authorization\AuthorizationInterface` implementation.
That interface defines the following method:

```php
isGranted(string $role, ServerRequestInterface $request) : bool
```

where `$role` is the role and `$request` is the PSR-7 HTTP request to authorize.

> This library uses the [laminas/laminas-permissions-rbac](https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-permissions-rbac/)
> library to implement the RBAC system. If you want to know more about the usage
> of this library, read the blog post 
> [Manage permissions with laminas-permissions-rbac](https://framework.zend.com/blog/2017-04-27-zend-permissions-rbac.html).
